The Ratnāvalī of Nāgārjuna
----------
Having paid homage to the All-knower, the only friend of all living beings, who is devoid of every defect, but adorned with every attribute,
I shall expound for thy spiritual profit, O king, the law which is altogether propitious. Nay, the law brings forth its fruit (when the seed is planted in him) who is worthy of receiving the supreme law (as thou art).
Whenever there is perfection in the law, the supreme happiness of salvation will also appear later on, because those who have reached the perfect life (which is the consequence of the practice of the law) will gradually attain to salvation.
Indeed, perfect life is considered to be happiness and salvation to be final emancipation from contingent life. The concise enunciation of the method of realizing that is summarized in faith and wisdom.
In so far as a man is possessed of faith, he becomes a partaker of the law; in so far as he is possessed of wisdom he apprehends according to truth. Of the two virtues wisdom is the foremost; faith, however, comes first.
He who does not transgress the law on account of worldly cravings, hatred, fear, and mental bewilderment must be considered as a man possessed of faith; noboby is a fitter recipient than he for salvation.
One must carefully examine whether actions deriving from one’s own body, words, thoughts, are good or not and, having settled what is good for others and for oneself, this only one must always do; then he is indeed a wise man.
Refraining from killing living beings, from theft and from adultery, control over one’s own words so as to avoid any false or slandering or cruel or futile speech;
Complete abstaining from covetousness, hatred, and wrong views denying the existence of karman; these ten virtues constitute the tenfold pure conduct. The actions opposed to these constitute the tenfold impure conduct.
Not drinking intoxicating liquirs, lawful livelihood, hurting nobody, kindness in giving, reverence towards those deserving reverence, and universal sympathy, this is in short the law.
Through penances alone inflicted upon the body one cannot get at the law; by that method one is unable either to stop doing harm to others or to benefit them.
Those men who, disregarding the great road of the supreme law, clear on account of generosity, moral conduct, and patience, wander through the wrong paths of that wilderness which are bodily penance,
enter indeed a terrific forest, viz. the saṃsāra which has infinite rebirths as its trees, while beasts of prey, namely moral defilements, lick their limbs.
Those who kill any living being shall have a short life in a new existence; those who do harm to others shall suffer many offences; by stealing one shall be thwarted in worldly enjoyments; an adulterer shall get enemies.
The fruit of telling falsehood is repulse, of slandering breaking the friendship, of cruel speech hearing things unpleasant, of futile expressions unfortunate words.
Covetousness causes the failing of every desire, hatred is said to be the source of fears, wrong views produce incapacity of seeing aright, drinking of intoxicating liquors is the cause of mental confusion.
Avarice is the cause of poverty, bad livelihood of being deceived, pride of low birth, envy of scanty personal strength.
Anger of bad colour; stupidity is derived from not asking wise men (about the law); this fruit is ripened when one is reborn as a man; but first of all there is the rebirth in bad conditions of existence.
All those sins are called vices; their consequence has been explained above. All virtuous actions bring forth an effect quite contrary to that.
Covetousness, hatred, bewilderment, and karman derived from that are sinful; absence of covetousness, hatred, bewilderment, and karman derived from that are sinless.
From sinfulness every pain and every unhappy destiny are derived; from sinlessness every happy destiny and every pleasure in life are derived.
Refraining from every sinfulness and constant practice of sinlessness with mind, body, and word: this is styled the twofold law.
By this law one is saved from being born in the hells and among ghosts and beasts; nay, one gets plentifulness of joys, glory, and kingly power both among men and gods.
One gets the happiness of the gods, Brahmā, etc., through the four meditations, the four immeasurable experiences, and the four absorptions in the immaterial spheres; this is in short the law of the blissful life and its fruits.
On the other hand, the law of salvation consisting in the subtle and deep vision [of reality] was said by the Victorious ones to be terrific to foolish men who have not ears [prepared to hear it].
When the foolish man hears the utterance: “ I am not, I never shall be, nothing belongs nor ever will belong to me” he is stricken with fear, while the wise man gets over every fear.
The Buddha, who utters exclusively what is good to creatures, has stated them to be the offspring of the error that there is an ego and something belonging to the ego.
From the point of view of the absolute truth it is wrong to say that there is an ego or that there is something belonging to the ego, because both these assumptions are impossible when one has fully understood the reality of things.
The groups forming a person are originated from the assumption of a personality, but this personality is, from the standpoint of the absolute truth, unreal; then, if the seed of something is unreal, how can its sprout be real?
If one considers the groups as unreal, the assumption of a personality is abandoned; when the assumption of a personality is abandoned there is no more room for the groups.
Just as through the medium of a mirrors one sees the reflex of one’s own face, though it is in fact nothing real,
even so one perceives the personality through the medium of the groups, though, in truth, it is nothing real, but like the reflex of the face.
Just as without the medium of a mirror no reflex of the face can be seen, even so without the medium of the groups, the personality cannot be perceived.
The noble Ānanda having heard from the Buddha such tenets, obtained himself the insight into the law and over and over repeated them to the monks.
The assumtion of an ego exists as long as there is the assumption of the five groups; when there is the assumption of an ego there is again karman, and from this a new birth.
The whirl of life which has no beginning, no middle, and no end, like a whirling firebrand, whirls round with its three successions (personality, karman, and birth), which are the cause of the other.
In so far as the ego cannot be demonstrated as being produced either by itself or by another or both by itself and another, nor as being produced either in the past or in the present or in the future, the ego vanishes; then karman and lastly new birth.
When a man has recognized [that the idea of] the growth of cause and effect and [that of] their destruction must be understood in this way, he cannot maintain either that this world is not or that it is in reality.
But, if a man lacking discrimination hears this law which puts an end to all sorrows, he, on account of his ignorance, fears a place where there is nothing to be feared, and trembles.
When they say that all this will not exist in the nirvāṇa, this tenet does not make you afraid; but when we state that here everything is not existent, how is it that this statement fills you with fear?
In the condition of salvation (as you believe it to be) there are neither the groups nor the ego. But if such a kind of salvation is dear to you why do you not like the elimination of the individual ego and of the groups in this very existence [as preached by our doctrine]?
But nirvāṇa is not even non-existence; how can it be existence? nirvāṇa is called the suppression of any notion of existence and non-existence.
To say it in a few words, the nihilistic view consists in denying that karman brings forth its effect. This view is sinful and causes rebirth in the hells. It is called a wrong view.
To say it in a few words, the realistic view consists in affirming that karman brings forth its effect. It is meritorious and causes rebirth in happy conditions of existence. It is called the right view.
But when through the right knowledge one has suppressed any notion of existence or non-existence, one is beyond sin and virtue. Therefore the saints say that this is the salvation from good as well as from bad conditions of existence.
In so far as one recognizes that any origin has its cause, one gets rid of the nihilistic view, and in so far as one understands that there is a destruction of things determined by causes one gets rid of the realistic view.
If a cause is born before the effect or along with it, in both cases, from the standpoint of the absolute truth it cannot be the cause. In fact, the notion of birth cannot be conceived either from the conventional or from absolute point of view.
The notion of relation may be expressed in this way: When this thing exists this other thing also exists, for example, the idea of short in relation to that of long; when this thing is produced this other thing also is produced, for example, the light when there is a lamp.
If there is not the idea of short there cannot be that of long, as a self-existent thing; if there is no lamp it is impossible to have any light.
When one understands that the origin of the notions of cause and effect is like this, one cannot be the follower of the nihilistic view, in so far as he admits that the real nature of this world consists in the display of subjective differentiation.
Destruction also is derived from the display of subjective differentiation, and therefore one cannot admit that it is something real in itself. In such a way one does not become a follower of the realistic doctrine. Therefore, on so far as one has taken standpoint in neither view, one attains salvation.
A form seen from afar becomes manifest to the eyes when one gets near to it. If a mirage were really water, how is it that this cannot be seen when one gets near?
This world does not appear to those who are far away [from the truth] as it appears to those who are near [to it]— that is like a mirage devoid of specific characteristics.
Just as a mirage looks like water but it is neither water nor something real, in the same way the groups look like the ego, but in fact they are neither the ego nor something real.
If a man [seeing from afar] a mirage, believing that it is water, goes near to it and then thinks that there there is no water, this man is a fool.
So, when a man takes this world, which is similar to a mirage, to be either existent or non-existent that man is under the influence of bewilderment. But if there is bewilderment there is no salvation.
The nihilist is bound to be reborn in bad conditions of existence, the realist will be reborn in good conditions of existence. But those who have understood the things as they really are attain to salvation, in so far as they have taken their standpoint in neither view.
Those who, unwilling to conceive existence and non-existence according to their real nature (as stated by us), state, on account of their ignorance, [that nirvāṇa is] non-existence why they do not state that it is existence?
If you object that by the refutation of existence its non-existence is logically implicit, why then refutation of non-existence would not imply existence?
[For us] there is no thesis to be demonstrated, no rules of conduct, and on account of our taking shelter in the supreme illumination, not even mind, our doctrine is really the doctrine of nothingness. How then can we be called nihilists?
You may ask the common people along with its philosophers either the Sāṃkhyas or the Vaiśeṣikas or the Jainas or those who maintain the existence of a personality as represented by the five groups whether they preach a doctrine like ours beyond the dualism of existence and non-existence.
Therefore you must realize that this present of the law going beyond any dualism or existence and non-existence is the ambrosia of the teaching of the Buddhas known as the deep one.
How can this world be something real, since it does not vanish into non-existence nor come to existence nor even possess the duration of an instant, and is, therefore, beyond the threefold temporal relation?
From the standpoint of absolute truth, both this world as well as nirvāṇa are equally non-existent, either in the future or in the past or in the present; how can then any difference between them be real?
Since there is no duration, there is in truth neither origin nor destruction; how can therefore [this world] be really born, permanent, destroyed?
If there is always change into new forms is not, then, existence momentary? If, on the other hand, there is no change how could you explain the modification which we perceive positively in things.
One thing is momentary because either it disappears partially or totally. But since no difference appears in the two cases, therefore both assumptions are equally illogical.
If things are mere moments, they are, then, in no way existent; therefore any temporal relation like that of oldness, etc., would be impossible; if, on the contrary, things are not momentary, on account of their duration any temporal relation like that of oldness, etc., would be equally impossible.
If the instant has a final moment, we must assume that it has the other two moments as well, viz. the initial and the middle; but inasmuch as the instant consists of three moments the world cannot have the duration of the instant.
Again, beginning, middle, and end must be considered to be like the instant, viz. divided each one into three moments; the condition of being beginning, middle, and end is not existent by itself nor by another.
No [atom] is simple being many-sided; and no [atom] is sideless [in so far as its connection with other atoms would, then, be impossible]; on the other hand the idea of plurality is inconceivable without that of unity nor that of non-existence without that of existence.
Non-existence of existence is only possible through destruction or antithesis; but how can destruction or antithesis be conceivable if existence is logically impossible?
Therefore attainment of nirvāṇa does not imply in fact any destruction of worldly existence. That is why even the Buddha, when requested whether this world has an end, remained silent.
Therefore, the wise men realize that the All-knower is really the All-knower, because he did not preach this deep doctrine to those who are unfit [to hear it and cannot, therefore, rightly understand it].
Indeed the perfect Buddhas, who have realized the absolute truth, stated that this law, conducive to salvation, is deep, beyond the attachment to any particular thesis, stating the existence of nothing which one can depend upon.
Ignorant men, who like to state the existence of something which they can depend upon and did not yet get rid of contradictory theses like that of existence or non-existence of things, feel but fear of this law which does not state the existence of anything we can depend upon, and are then ruined.
And being themselves ruined they want to ruin others, also being afraid of (this teaching) where there is nothing to be feared. Be careful, O king, unless these wicked ones might ruin you also.
O King, lest you be ruined I will explain through the scriptures The mode of the supramundane, the reality that relies not on dualism.
This profundity which liberates and is beyond both sin and virtue Has not been tasted by those wyo fear the baseless, the others, the Forders and even by ourselves.
A person is not earth, not water, not fire, not wind, not space, Not consciousness and not all of them; what person is there other than these?
Just the person is not an ultimate but a composite of six constituents, So too each of them in turn is a composite and not an ultimate.
The aggregates are not the self, they are not in it, it is not in them, without them it is not, It is not mixed with the aggregates like fire and fuel, therefore how can the self exist?
THe three elements are not earth, they are not in it, it is not in them, without them it is not; Since this applies to each, they like the self are false.
By themselves earth, water, fire and wind do not inherently exist; When any three are absent, there cannot be one when one is absent, so too are the three.
If when three are absent, the one does not exist and if when one is absent, the three do not exist, Then each itself does not exist; how can they produce a composite?
Otherwise if each itself exists, why without fuel is there no fire? Likewise why is there no water, wind or earth without motility, hardness or cohesion?
If [it is answered that] fire is well known [not to exist without fuel but the other three elements exist independently], how could your three exist in themselves Without the others? It is impossible for the three not to accord with dependent-arising.
How can those existing by themselves be mutually dependent? How can those which exist not by themselves be mutually dependent?
If as individuals they do not exist, but where there is one, the other three are there, Then if unmixed, they are not in one place, and if mixed, they cease to be individuals.
The elements do not themselves exist individually, so how could their own individual characters do so? What do not themselves individually exist cannot predominate; their characters are regarded as conventionalities.
This mode of refutation is also to be applied to colours, odours, tastes and objects of touch, Eye, consciousness and form, ignorance, action and birth,
Agent, object, acting and number, possession, cause, effect and time, Short and long and so forth, name and name-bearer as well.
Earth, water, fire and wind, tall and short, subtle and coarse Virtue and so forth are said by the Subduer to cease in the consciousness [of reality].
The spheres of earth, water, fire and wind do not appear to that Undemonstrable consciousness, complete lord of the limitless.
Here tall and short, subtle and coarse, virtue and non-virtue And here names and forms all cease to be.
What was not known is known to consciousness as [the reality of] all That appeared before. Thereby these phenomena later cease to be in consciousness.
All these phenomena related to beings are seen as fuel for the fire of consciousness, They are consumed through being burned by the light of true discrimination.
The reality is later ascertained of what was formerly imputed by ignorance; When a thing is not found, how can there be a non-thing?
Because the phenomena of forms are only names, space too is only a name; Without the elements how could forms exist? Therefore even ‘name-only’ does not exist.
Feelings, discriminations, factors of composition and consciousnesses are to be considered Like the elements and the self, thereby the six constituents are selfless.
Chapter One: High Status and Definite Goodness
As the plantain tree, split down along with all its components, is naught, even so the individual, when split down along with its constituents.
The Victorious ones said therefore that everything is devoid of self; they have ascertained the real nature of the constituents [forming an individual] and [shown] that they also are devoid of any reality.
In this way from the standpoint of the absolute truth [the notion] of a self or of a non-self cannot be conceived. Therefore the Great Ascetic excluded both views, viz. that of the existence of a self and that of the non-existence of a self.
The Ascetic stated that whatever is perceived by the senses, viz. is seen or heard and so forth, is neither true nor false. In fact, if there is a thesis, an antithesis is derived from it, but both thesis and antithesis do not really exist (as per se existent without their contrary).
Therefore from the metaphysical standpoint this universe transcends both reality and unreality, and so, in truth, it cannot admit either of existence or of non-existence.
How could therefore the all-knower affirm that this universe, about which no statement is absolutely possible, has an end or is without an end, is a duality or a non-duality?
“Many Buddhas have gone, will come, or do appear in this very moment. The notion of a limit as regards living beings in their innumerable series is said by them to be born from the threefold temporal relation.”
“There is no cause for the increasing of the world of creatures; their passing away is determined by the threefold temporal relation. How could then the Buddha, who is the all-knower, leave this question as regards the commencement or the end of the world unanswered?”
In this consists the very depth of our doctrine, viz. that it remains a secret for the ordinary people. The teaching that the world is to be compared with a magic play represents the essence of the doctrine of all Buddhas.
We can perceive the birth or the end of an elephant created by magic power, though in reality, it has neither birth nor end;
even so we can see a beginning and an end in this world, though, from the standpoint of the metaphysical truth, it has neither origin nor end.
As an elephant created by magic power comes from nowhere and goes to nowhere, in so far as, being due to a mere bewilderment, it does not stay anywhere as something existent,
even so, this universe like a magic play comes from nowhere and goes to nowhere; being due to a mere mental bewilderment, it does not stay anywhere.
What is, therefore, in its essence this universe, which, transcending the threefold temporal relation, cannot be said to be or not to be, except from the standpoint of the conventional truth?
Therefore for this very reason, and for no other one, the Buddha left this world undetermined as regards four points, viz. if it has an end, if it has no end, if it is duality, if it is a unity.
The uncleanness of the body, though it is something material and perceivable, does not abide in the mind, though it is continually under our eyes;
how, then, could this perfect doctrine, extremely subtle and deep and devoid of any support, easily descend into our mind?
This is why the ascetic, after having realized this doctrine, declined, at the first moment, to preach it; he knew in fact that this very doctrine is very difficult to be understood by common people on account of its depth.
If this doctrine is not well understood it causes the ruin or the unintelligent man, since he sinks into the impurity of nihilism.
Some other fools who think themselves to be wise do not understand it properly, and therefore fall head down into the hell of Avīci, being ruined by their criticism against the perfect doctrine.
By food badly digested a man gets his ruin, but by food well digested he enjoys long life, good health, physical strength, and other pleasures;
even so those who do not properly understand the doctrine will get their ruin; on the contrary, by its rigth understanding one obtains happiness in this life and the supreme illumination.
Therefore, giving up any criticism against this doctrine and getting rid of the nihilistic view, strive after the right knowledge in order to arrive at the complete attainement of your object.
If one does not thoroughly understand this doctrine egotism is originated; from this, karma, both moral and immoral is derived, and from this a new life which will accordingly take place in good conditions of existence or in bad ones.
Therefore as long as this doctrine, which annihilates egotism, is not thoroughly understood, so long apply yourself with great care to the [practice of] the law, which consists in liberality, moral conduct, and patience.
Therefore, o king, whoever in the beginning, in the middle and in the end accomplishes his actions according to the law, never sinks either here or in the other world.
From the law one gets renown and happiness and has no cause of fear either during life or at the point of death; he will share copious happiness in another existence; be therefore always a partaker of the law.
The law alone is the supreme policy, because the affection of men is captivated by the law. When the affection of men is captivated, the king is not deceived either here or in the after life.
That policy which is against the law displeases subjects; and when subjects are displeased, the king cannot rejoice either in this or in another life.
How is it possible that some men of mischivous intelligence could think a science productive of evil, intented to deceiving others, harmful, conducive to bad rebirths (viz. politics) to be a science aiming at the public welfare?
How can a man addicted to deceive others be considered as really clever when, on the contrary, he deceives only himself for thousands of rebirths?
If you want to displease your enemy, give up every sin and take shelter in virtue; in this way you will obtain your own benefit and at the same time your enemy will be be pleased.
Liberality, kindness in speaking, benefiting others, beings intented to the spiritual profit (of others as well as of oneself), through these virtues behave towards men and religion.
Truth alone begets firm confidence [of subjects] in kings; even so untruth engenders extreme mistrust towards them.
Truth in reality is not that which is devoid of falsehood, nor that which develops in a pure mind; truth is the absolute good done to others; its contrary is falsehood on account of its being harmful to others.
A single brilliant act of liberality overshadows the faults of the kings; even so miserliness ruins all their virtues.
A man who has control over himself acquires deepness of mind; from deepness of mind he obtains dignity; from dignity lustre is derived; from lustre authority. Practice therefore control over thyself.
A king who, on account of his wisdom, is resolute in his ideas, who does not depend on others and is determined, cannot be deceived; be therefore solely devoted to wisdom.
A king who is possessed of the four blessings, viz. truth, liberality, self-control, and wisdom, is praised by gods and men, as the law itself with its four blessings.
When [a king] sits together with his ministers restrained in their speeches, spotless, purified by their wisdom and their compassion, wisdom and law will then grow in him for ever.
Scarce are those who can give wholesome advice, scarcer are those who listen to them, but far scarcer still are those who immediately practice wholesome counsel.
Having therefore understood that something is wholesome though unpalatable, do it at once; even so a clever man in order to recover his health drinks a medicine however acrid.
Keep always in your mind that things such as life, good health, and kingship are impermanent; frightened therefore [by impermanence], you will seek for the law as the only refuge.
Realizing that death is inevitable and that, as soon as one is dead, the consequence of sin is sorrow, you cannot annihilate sin even through the enjoyment of this life.
If, in a certain moment, you see no danger and in another moment you see a danger, then, if you trust in one, how is it that you do not fear the other?
By being addicted to drinking one is in this world despised by others, is unable to carry out his business, loses his wealth and, on account of the bewilderment that proceeds from that, he cannot accomplish his duty. Give up therefore drinking.
Gambling causes avarice, unpleasantness, hatred, deception, cheating, Wildness, lying, senselessness and harsh speech, therefore never gamble.
Lust for a woman mostly comes from thinking that her body is clean, but there is nothing clean in a woman’s body.
The mouth is a vessel filled with foul saliva and filth between the teeth, The nose with fluids, snot and mucus, the eyes with their own filth and tears.
The body is a vessel filled with excrement, urine, lungs and liver; He whose vision is obscured and does not see a woman thus, lusts for her body. (Just as some fools desire an ornamented pot of filth, So the ignorant and obscured and the worldly desire women.1 )
If the world is greatly attached to the nauseous stinking body Whish should cause loss of attachment, how can it be led to freedome from desire?
Just as pigs yearn greatly for a source of excrement, urine and vomit, So some lustful ones desire a source of excrement, urine and vomit.
This filthy city of a body, with protruding holes for the elements Is called by stupid beings an object of pleasure.
Once you have seen for yourself the filth of excrement, urine and so forth, how could you be attracted to a body so composed?
Why should you lust desirously for this while recognising it as a filthy form produced by a seed whose essence is filth, a mixture of blood and semen?
He who lies on the filthy mass covered by skin moistened with Those fluids, merely lies on top of a woman’s bladder.
If whether beautiful or ugly, whether old or young, All the bodies of women are filthy from what attributes does your lust arise?
Just as it is not fit do desire filth although it have a good colour And shape it its very freshness, so it is with a woman’s body.
How could the nature of this putrid corpse, a rotten mass covered outside by skin, Not be seen when it looks so very horrible?
‘The skin is not foul, it is like a cloak.’ Over a mass of filth how ould it be clean?
A pot though beautiful outside is reviled when filled with filth. Why is the body, when so filled and foul by nature, not reviled?
If against filth you revile, why not against this body Which befouls clean scents, garlands, food and drink?
Just as one’s own or others’ filthiness is reviled, Why not revile against one’s own and others’ filthy bodies?
Since your own body is as filthy as a woman’s, Should not you abandon desire for self and other?
If you yourself wash this body dripping from the nine wounds And still do not think it filthy, what use have you for profound instruction?
Whoever composes poetry with metaphors which elevate this body— O how shameless! O how stupid! How embarrasing before the wise!
Since these sentient beings are obscured by the darkness of ignorance, They quarrel mostly over what they want like dogs for the sake of some filth.
There is pleasure when a sore is scratched, but to be without sores is more pleasurable still; There are pleasures in worldly desires, but to be without desires is more pleasurable still.
If you thus analyse, even though you do not become free from desire, Because your desire has lessened you will no longer lust for women.
To hunt game is an endless cause of a short life, Suffering and hell, therefore always keep from killing.
Bad like a snake with poisonous fangs, its body stained with filth, Is he who frightens embodied beings when he encounters them.
Just as farmers are gladdened when a great rain-cloud gathers, So one who gladdens embodies beings when he encounters them is good.
Thus always observe the practices and not those counter to them. If you and the world wish to gain the highest enlightenment,
Its roots are the altruistic aspiration to enlightenment firm like Meru, the king of mountains, The compassion which reaches to all quarters, the wisdom which relies not on duality.
O great King, listen to how you body will be adorned With the two and thirty signs of a great being.
Through the proper honouring of reliquaries, honourable beings, superiors and the elderly You will become a Universal Monarch, your glorious hands and feet marked with [a design of] wheels.
O King, always maintain firmly what you have vowed about practices, You will then become a Bodhisattva with feet that are very level.
Through gifts and pleasant speech, purposeful and concordent behaviour You will have hands with glorious fingers joined by webs [of light].
Through abundant giving of the best food and drink [your glorious hands and feet will be soft; your hands and feed and shoulder blades[(This line is added in the Tibetan, see Hahn p.67 n.79cd.)]] And the nape of your neck will broaden, so your body will be big and those seven areas broad.
Through never doing harm and freeing the condemned beautiful will be your body, straight and large, Very tall with long fingers and broad backs of the heels.
Through promoting the vowed practices your good colour will be glorious, Your ankles will not be prominent, your body hairs will grow upwards.
Through your zeal for knowledge and the arts and so forth, and through imparting them You will have the calves of an antelope, a sharp mind and great wisdom.
If others seek your wealth and possessions, through the discipline of immediate giving You will have broad hands, a pleasant complexion and will become a leader of the world.
Through reconciling well friends who have been divided Your glorious secret organ will retract inside.
Through giving good houses and nice comfortable carpets Your colour will be very soft like pure stainless gold.
Through giving the highest powers [or kingdoms] and following a teacher properly You will be adorned by each and every hair and by a circle of hair between the eyebrows.
Through speech that is pleasant and pleasing and by acting upon the good speech [of others] You will have curving shoulders and a lion-like upper body.
If you nurse and cure the sick, Your chest will be broad, You will live naturally and all tastes will be the best.
Through initiating activities concordant with the practices, the swelling on your crown will stand out well and [your body] will be symmetrical like a banyan tree.
Through speaking true and soft words over the years, O lord of men, Your tongue will be lond and your voice that of Brahmā.
Through speaking true words always at all times You will have cheeks like a lion, be glorious and hard to best.
Through showing great respect, serving others and doing what should be done, Your teeth will shine very white and even.
Through using true and non-divisive speech over a long time You will have forty glorious teeth set evenly and good.
Through viewing things with love and without desire, hatred or delusion Your eyes will be bright and blue with eyelashes like a bull.
Thus in brief know well these two and thirty signs Of a great lion of a being together with their causes.
The eighty minor marks arise from concordant cause of love; Fearing this text would be too long, I will not, O King, explain them.
All Universal Emperors are regarded as having these, But their purity, their lustre and beauty cannot begin to match those of a Buddha.
The good major and minor marks of a Universal Emperor Are said to arise from a single act of faith in the King of Subduers.
But such virtue accumulated with a mind one-pointed for a hundred times ten million aeons Cannot produce even one of the hair-pores of a Buddha.
Just as the blilliance of suns is slightly like that of fireflies, So the signs of a Buddha are slightly like those of a Universal Emperor.
Chapter Two: An Interwoven Explanation of Definite Goodness and High Status.
Great King, hear how from the great scriptures of the Mahāyāna The marks of a Buddha arise from merit inconceivable.
The merits which creates all Solitary Realisers, Learners and Non-Learners And all the merit of the transient world is measureless like the universe itself.
Through such merit ten times extended one hair-pore of a Buddha is achieved; All the hair-pores of a Buddha arise in just the same way.
Through multiplying by a hundred the merit which produces All the hair-pores of a Buddha one auspicious minor mark is won.
O King, as much merit as is required for one auspicious minor mark, So much is required for each up to the eightieth.
Through multiplying by a hundred the collection of merit which achieves The eighty auspicious minor marks one major sign of a great being arises.
Through multiplying by a thousand the extensive merit which is the cause Of achieving the thirty minor signs the hair-treasure like a full moon arises.
Through multiplying by a hundred thousand the merit for the hair-treasure A protector’s crown-protrusion is produced, imperceptible [as to size].
Though such merit is measureless for brevity it is said to have a measure And all of it is said to be ten times the merit of the world.
When the causes of even the Form Body of a Buddha are immeasurable As the world, how then could the causes of the Body of Truth be measured.
If the causes of all things are small but they produce extensive effects, The thought that the measureless causes of Buddhahood have measurable effects must be eliminated.
The Form Body of a Buddha arises from collected merit, The Body of Truth in brief, O King, arises from collected wisdom.
Thus these two collections cause Buddhahood to be attained, So in brief always rely upon merit and wisdom.
Do not be lazy about this [amassing] of merit to achieve enlightenment Since reasoning and scripture can restore one’s spirits.
Just as all directions space, earth, water, fire and wind Are without limit, so suffering sentient beings are limitless.
The Bodhisattvas through their compassion lead these limitless sentient beings Out of suffering and establish them definitely in Buddhahood.
Whether sleeping or not sleeping, after thoroughly assuming [such compassion] He who remains steadfast, even though he might become non-consciouentious,
Always accumulates merit as limitless as all sentient beings, for their number has no limit. Know then that since [the causes] are limitless limitless Buddhahood is not hard to attain.
[A Bodhisattva] stays for a limitless time [in the world], for limitless embodied beings he seeks The limitless [qualities of] enlightenment and performs virtuous actions without limit.
Though enlightenment is limitless, how could he not attain it With these four limitless collections wihtout being delayed for long?
The limitless collections of merit and wisdom Eradicate most quickly the sufferings of mind and body.
The physical sufferings of bad migrations such as hunger and thirst arise from sins; A Bodhisattva does not sin and through his merit does not [suffer physically] in other lives.
The mental suffering of desire, fear, avarice and so forth arise From obscuration; he knows them to be baseless and so can uproot quickly [all mental suffering].
Since he is not greatly harmed by physical and mental pain, Why should he be discouraged even though he leads the worldly beings in all worlds?
It is hard to bear suffering even for a little, what need is there to speak of doing so for long? What can ever harm a happy man who never suffers for an instant?
If his body does not suffer, how can he suffer in his mind? Through his great compassion he feels pain for the world and so stays in it long.
Do not then be lazy thinking Buddhahood is far away. Always strive had for these collections to wipe out faults and attain virtues.
Realising that ignorance, desire and hatred are defects, forsake them completely. Realise that non-desire, non-hatred and non-ignorance are virtues and so practice them with vigour.
Through desire one is reborn a hungry ghost, through hatred in a hell, through ignorance Mostly as an animal; through stopping these one becomes a god or a human being.
To eliminate all defects and maintain the virtues are the practices of high status; To wipe out all misconceptions through the consciousness [of reality] is the practice of definite goodness.
With respect and without stint you should construct images of Buddha, reliquaries and temples And provide abundant riches, food, necessities and so forth.
Please construct from all precious substances images of Buddha with fine proportions, Well designed and sitting on lotuses adorned with all precious substances.
You should sustain with all endeavour the excellent doctrine and the assembly of monks, and decorate reliquaries with gold and jewelled friezes.
Revere the reliquaries with gold and silver flowers, Diamonds, corals, pearls, emeralds, cat’s eye gems and sapphires.
To revere the teachers of the doctrine is to do what pleases them, [Offering] goods and services and relying firmly on the doctrine.
Listen to a teacher with homage and respect, serve and pray to him. Always respectfully revere the other Bodhisattvas.
You should not respect, revere or do homage to others, the Forders, Because through that the ignorant would become enamoured of the faulty.
You should make donations of the word of the King of Subduers and of the treatises He gave, as well as pages and books along with their prerequisites, the pens and ink.
As a way to increase wisdom wherever there is a school Provide for the livelihood of teachers and bestow estates [for their provision].
In order to root out the suffering of sentient beings, the old, young and infirm, You should establish through your influence barbers and doctors in your kingdom.
Please act with good wisdom and provide hostels, amusement centres, dikes, Ponds, rest-houses, water-vessels, beds, food, grass and wood.
Please establish rest-houses in all temples, towns and cities And provide water-vessels on all arid roadways.
Always care compassionately for the sick, the unprotected, those stricken With suffering, the lowly and the poor and take special care to nourish them.
Until you have given to monks and beggars seasonally appropriate food And drink, produce, grain and fruit, you should not partake of them.
At the sites of the water-vessels place shoes, umbrellas, water-filters, Tweezers for removing thorns, needles, thread and fans.
Within the vessels place the three medicinal fruits, the three fever medicines, butter, Honey, salve for the eyes and antidotes to poison, written spells and prescriptions.
At the sites of the vessels place salves for the body, feet and head, Wool, small chairs, gruel, jars, pots, axes and so forth.
Please have small containers in the shade filled with sesame, Rice, grains, foods, molasses, and suitable water.
At the openings of ant-hills pelase have trustworthy men always put food and water, sugar and piles of grain.
Before and after taking food offer appropriate fare To hungry ghosts, dogs, ants, birds and so forth.
Provide extensive care for the persecuted, the victims [of disasters], The stricken and diseased, and for the worldly beings in conquered areas.
Provide stricken farmers with seeds and sustenance, Eliminate high taxes by reducing their rate.
Protect [the poor] from the pain of wanting [your wealth], set ut no [new] tolls and reduce those [that are heavy], Free them from the suffering [that follows when the tax collector] is waiting at the door.
Eliminate thieves and robbers in your own and others’ countries. Please set prices fairly and keep profits level [when things are scarce].
You should know full well [the counsel] that your ministers have offered, And should always follow it if it benefits the world.
Just as you love to think what could be done to help yourself, So should you love to think what could be done to help others.
If only for a moment make yourself available for the use of others Just as earth, water, fire, wind, medicine and forests [are available to all].
Even during hte time needed to take seven steps merit measureless as the sky Is produced in Bodhisattvas who are well disposed to giving wealth away.
If you give to the needy girls of beauty well adorned, You will thereby master the spells to retain the excellent doctrine.
Formerly the Subduer provided along with every need and so forth Eighty thousand girls with all adornments.
Lovingly give to beggars various and glittering Clothes, ornaments, perfumes, garlands and enjoyments.
If you provide [facilities] for those most deprived who lack The means [to study] the doctrine, there is no greater gift than that.
Even give poison to those whom it will help, But do not give the best food to those whom it will not help.
Justt as some say that it will help a cut finger to hold a snake, So it is said that the Subduer brings discomfort to help others.
You should respect most highly the excellent doctrine and its teachers, You should listen reverently to it and then give it to others.
Take no pleasure in worldly talk, but take delight in what passes beyond the world, Cause good qualities to generate in others in the same way that you wish them for yourself.
Please be not satisfied with the doctrines you have heard, but retain the meanings and discriminate. Please always make great effort to offer teachers presents.
Recite not from the wordly Nihilists, stop debating in the interests of pride, Praise not you own good qualities, but stress those even of your foes.
Do not say what hurts, with evil intent talk Not of others, analyse your own mistakes yourself.
You should free yourself completely from the faults the wise decry in others, And through your power cause others to do the same.
Consider the harm done to you by others as created by your former deeds, be not angry, Act in such a way that you do not cause more suffering and your own faults will disappear.
Provide help to others without hope of reward, Bear suffering alone and share your pleasures with beggars.
Do not be inflated even when you have aqcuired the prosperity of gods. Do not even be depressed by the disadvantageous poverty of hungry ghosts.
For your own sake always speak the truth, even should it cause your death Or ruin your kingdom, do not speak in any other way.
Always observe the discipline of actions as it has been explained, Then, O glorious one, you will become the best of models upon earth.
You should always well analyse everything before you act, Through seeing things just as they are you will not rely on others.
Through these practices your kingdom will be happy, a broad canopy of fame Will rise in all directions, and your ministers will revere you completely.
The causes of death are many, those of staying alive are few, These too can become the causes of death, therefore always perform the practices.
If you carry out the practices, the mental happiness which arises In the world and yourself is most beneficial.
Through the practices you will sleep and awaken in happiness; Faultless in your inner nature happy will even be your dreams.
Intent on serving your parents, respectful to the principles of your lineage, Using your resources well, patient generous, with kindly speech, without divisiveness and truthful,
Through performing such discipline for one lifetime you will become a king of gods; As such you will do still more, therefore observe such practices.
Even three times a day offer three hundred cooking pots of food Does not match a portion of the merit acquired in one instant of love.
Though [through love] you are not liberated you will attain the eight virtues of love, Gods and humans will be friendly, even [non-humans] will protect you,
You will have pleasures of the mind and many [of the body], poison and weapons will not harm you, Effortlessly will you attain your aims and be reborn in the world of Brahmā.
If you cause sentient beings to generate the aspiration to enlightenment and make it firm, Your own aspiration will always be to enlightenment firm like [Meru] king of mountains.
Through faith you will not be without leisure, through good ethics you will have good migrations, Through becoming familiar with emptiness you will be unattached to all phenomena.
Through not wavering you will attain awareness, and intelligence through thinking; through respect You will realise what the docrtines mean, through their retention you will become wise.
Through not causing the hearing and the giving of the doctrine to be obscured You will company with Buddhas and will quickly attain your wish.
Through non-attachment you will learn what [the doctrines] mean, through not being miserly your resources will increase, Through not being proud you will become chief [of those respected], through enduring the doctrine you will attain retention.
Through giving the five essentials as well as non-fright to the frightened No evil will there be to harm you, of the mighty you will be the best.
Through offering many lamps at reliquaries and elsewhere And oil for lamps in dark places your divine eye will open.
Through offering bells and instruments for the worship of reliquaries And elsewhere drums and trumpets, your divine ear will open.
Through not relating others’ mistakes and not talking of their defective limbs, But protecting their minds, you will gain knowledge of the minds of others.
Through giving conveyances and shoes, through serving the feeble and through Providing teachers with youths you will acquire the skill to create magical emanations.
Through acting to promote the doctrine, remembering its books and their meaning, And through stainless giving of the doctrine you will remember your continuum of lives.
Through knowing thoroughly, correctly and truly that no phenomena inherently exist, You will attain the sixth clairvoyance that extinguishes all contaminations well.
Through cultivating the wisdom of reality which is the same [for all phenomena] and is moistened with compassion For the sake of liberating all sentient beings, You will become a Conqueror with all the excellences.
Through various pure aspirations your Buddha Land will be purified, Through offering gems to the King Of Subduers you will give out infinite light.
Therefore knowing how actions and their effects agree, For you own sake help beings always and so help yourself.
Chapter Three: The Collections for Enlightenment
Even if a king follows a path contrary to religion and to reason he is nevetheless praised by his subjects (on account of fear); he, therefore, hardly knows what is appropriate or not.
It would be very difficult to say to anybody else what is appropriate, when it is unpleasant; how much more will that be to an emperor as you are, since I am speaking, a simple monk as I am?
But on account of your love and because I feel compassion for the living beings, I alone will say to you what befits you, though it will be extremely unpleasant.
(The master), out of his compassion, must say at the proper moment to his disciple what befits him, is true, mild, and full of significance. So said the Blessed one. You are now instructed according to this principle.
If a man persists in being mild and truthful when he is praised, he will always accept that which is worth hearing; even so those who want to wash themselves choose water possessing good properties.
When I say these words to you knowing that they are profitable in this life and in other eixstences, put them into practice; they will prove useful to yourself and to the world.
You have got your wealth since you were liberal in former existences; but if, being ungrateful and greedy, you are not now also liberal towards those who beg some help from you, you will never get this wealth any more.
A servant, if he is not paid, does not carry in this world any provision on the way, but a poor beggar without being paid carries for the other life baggage a hundred times heavier.
Be always noble-minded and delighting in noble deeds, because from a noble deed every kind of noble fruits are derived.
Make your temple the prosperous and renowned abode of the Three Jewels, unhurt even in thought by mean kings.
It is better not to build that temple which does not cause horripilation to neighbouring kings, since it is not a glory even when one is dead.
With the example of your extreme generosity let the admiration and the endeavours of the generous ones grow and kill the endeavours of the dull-witted ones, even at the const of all your possessions.
Even against your will you must give up everything and pass into another existence. But whatever has been employed for the law will go ahead.
The property of a previous king has fallen into the hands of the king (his predecessor); of what use can it then be to the religion, happiness and glory of his predecessor?
From the enjoyment of your wealth you get only happiness in this life, but from the gift of that wealth you will get happiness in a future existence. Since whatever has not been either given or enjoyed is lost, sorrow only is derived from that wealth; how can that produce happiness?
When you are on the very point of death you are unable to give away; you are, in fact, then no longer master of your own will on account of your ministers becoming disaffected towards the king whose departure is impending and eager to do what pleases the new prince.
While, therefore, you enjoy good health, even at the cost of all your wealth, quickly build a temple. You are in fact amidst the very conditions from which death comes, like a lamp put where a strong wind blows.
Let all other religious duties, such as processions, etc., established by former kings, continue as they are.
Let them be attended by those who harm nobody, whose conduct is pure, who keep their vows, please their guests, are patient towards everybody, lovers of peace, and always energetic.
Let blind, sick, crippled, afflicted, helpless, beggars equally get food and drink without offence.
Bestow the same favours upon the followers of the law even if they are in no need and if they reside in other kingdoms.
Appoint as officers entrusted with the supervision of spiritual affairs those who are diligent in spiritual affairs, not greedy, wise, acting according to the law, never acting against their (duty).
Appoint as you ministers those who know the right politics, who are observant of the law, affectionate, pure, faithful, brave, of good family, rich in moral virtues, grateful.
Appoint as ministers of war just those who are nobleminded, liberal, brave, affectionate, wealthy, steady, always attentive, observant of law.
Appoint as ministers of finance those whose habitats are in agreement with the law, who are pure, clever, able in business, expert in learning, of perfect conduct, impartial, kind, advanced in age.
Every month hear from them the report of the expenditure and of the income; and, after having heard it, you must say yourself whatever must be done as regards the various offices, viz. that of the supervision of spiritual affairs and the others.
If your kingdom is ruled by you not on account of worldly renown nor of worldly pleasures but with the purpose of protecting the law, then it will be extremely fruitful; otherwise it will be conducive to misfortune.
Generally, O king, in this world one is the prey of the others; still listen to the method by which you may have two things (apparently irreconcilable), viz. kingdom and law.
You must always collect many ministers inspecting various businesses, possessing the experience of old men, born in high families, who know the rules of government and are afraid of committing sin.
Even if they order according to justice, punishment, imprisonment, and beating (of culprits), be yourself always moved to compassion and disposed to kindness.
With your compassion, O king, you must always bend to righteousness the mind of all living beings, even of those who have commited terrible sins.
Special compassion indeed one must feel for those cruel persons who have committed terrible sins; in fact these miserable men are the proper object for the compassion of noble-minded men.
Every day or every five days set free prisoners who are becoming weak [by the imprisonment]; set free all the others also according to the proper course; let nobody remain in prison.
If the thought does not come to your mind to set somebody free, this means that you have not yet a perfect control of your feelings as regards that man. But from this lack of control perpetual accumulation of sin is derived.
Up to the time of their discharge let them enjoy a pleasant imprisonment and the comfort of barbers, baths, drinks, food, medicines, and garments.
You must punish them from compassion and from a desire to turn them into worthy persons, as you do as regards unworthy sons; but you must not be moved by hatred or by desire of material welfare.
After having pondered (the proper means) and having well known the case, you must expel from the country bad people and murderers, without killing or injuring them.
Uninfluenced [by others] you must explore your state with the eyes of the spies; always attentive and thoughtful you must do whatever business is in accordance with the law.
Always honour with generous gifts, respect and homage those who take their resort to virtue, and as is proper, others also, but according to their merits.
The king may be compared to a tree whose abundant flowers are the respect bestowed upon the worthy, whose great gruits are his liberality, whose shadow is his forbearance; the subjects will take shelter in his kingdom like birds in such a tree.
If a king possessing the virtues of liberality and morality is also full of majesty, he pleases his subjects like a sweetmeat of sugar, hardened by cardamon and pepper.
Following this policy, you will get a kingdom not ruled by the “policy of the fish”; acting in this way there will be neither unrule nor injustice, but law only.
You did not carry with you this kingdom from the other world, nor will you carry it thither (after death). It has been obtained through law, and therefore, if you want to get it (in another life), you must not do anything against the law.
You must endeavour, O king, with all your energy not to gain at the price of that capital which is the kingdom those goods of sorrow which are wont to come one after the other.
But rather with all you energy you must endeavour, O king, so that at the price of that capital which is your kingdom you may enjoy a long series of royal goods.
Even if one obtains as universal emperor supremacy over the world with its four continents, one can only experience two kinds of joy, one physical and the other mental.
Bodily pleasure is a pleasant sensation which merely consists in the removal of pain; the mental one consists in mere ideas, and is produced only by imagination.
In this world any kind of pleasure is either a mere removal of pain or a mere imagination; it is therefore in fact unreal.
The four continents (as in the case of the universal emperor), the territory, the town, the habitation, the place of residence, sits, cloths, beds, food, drinking, elephants, horses, women are enjoyed severally.
Whenever and wherever our mind is fixed [upon something], from that and then only pleasure is derived. But all other things have in fact no scope in so far as that moment we do not pay attention to them.
When one, perceiving the five objects of sense-perception with the five senses, such as the eye, etc., does not work with the imagination, then, for this reason, one does not feel any pleasure in them.
When we know a certain object with a certain sense, then, we do not know other objects with the other senses, since at that time the other [objects] are not object [of perception, not being in relation with the senses].
The mind perceiving the form of an object which has already been perceived by the senses and (is therefore) past, working with the imagination, thinks it to be a pleasure.
If, in this world, one sense knows only one object, then, without its object of perception, that sense would have no scope and the object also will have no scope without the sense which perceives it [in so far as both are reciprocally conditioned].
The birth of a son is conditioned by the mother and the father; even so it is stated that the production of consciousness is conditioned by a sense, e.g. the eye and its object, viz. the object visible.
Objects along with their (correspondent) sensory moments, either past or future, are of no purpose [as regards the production of consciousness]; even so the present ones because they cannot be dissociated from the two aforesaid moments.
The eye wrongly perceives as a wheel a turning firebrand: even so all senses [wrongly] perceive the various objects as being present.
The organs of senses as well as the objects of senses are said to be composed of the five material elements; but since each element is in se unreal, even those senses and those objects are in fact unreal.
If we conceive the material elements as being separate the consequence woult be that fire can burn without any fuel; if, on the other hand, they are combined together, it is impossible to speak of their characteristics: the same decision must also be applied to the other elements.
In this way, since the material elements are in either case (viz. either separately taken or combined) unreal, their combination is (also) unreal; since their combination is unreal, material forms are therefore unreal.
[In the same way the other] constituents like consciousness, sensation, ideas, and forces separately taken are in se completely unreal: therefore from the standpoint of the absolute truth there is only unreality.
Just as there is an assumption of pleasure, when in fact there is removal of pain, even so the assumption of pain is derived from obstruction of pleasure.
By [meditation of the principle that] everything is devoid of any essence one puts an end to the thirst after association with pleasure and the thirst after dissociation from pain; for those who see (such a truth) there is liberation thence.
If you ask who can see that, we reply that from the standpoint of conventional truth it is the mind which sees that (but not from the absolute standpoint); in fact (the function of) mind is not possible without mental contents nor alont with these, since it will serve no purpose.
When one, perceiving that there is nothing which one can depend upon, considers this world according to its real nature, viz. as unreal, then, having extinguished the sources of attachment, one enters into Nirvāṇa, just as fire which is extinguished when the conbustible matter comes to an end.
The Bodhisattva also has this vision and therefore he is certain to attain to the perfect illumination; but it is only out of compassion that he passes from one existence to another, before entering the gate of the supreme illumination.
The Tathāgatas have expounded in the Great Vehicle the accumulation (of merit and knowledge) of the Bodhisattvas: only those who are bewildered by foolishness or hatred can find fault with it.
A man abusing the Great Vehicle is one who does not distinguish between merits and sins, or one who takes merits to be defects or one who hates merits.
An abuser of Mahāyāna is said to be one who knows that sins are of harm to others and merits benefit others and still abuses Mahāyāna.
He who hates the Great Vehicle, which is a mine of merits, in so far as it rejoices in benefiting others without any consideration for personal interest, is thereby burnt (by the fire of hell).
Even a man possessing faith (in the law) may hate the merits (of the Great Vehicle) on account of some principle badly understood; even so somebody else being addicted to anger. But (the scripture) says: “Even a man possessing faith may be burnt (by the fire of hell)”; How much greater will the danger be for a man inclined to hatred?
The doctors say that a poison can be the antidote of another poison; even so there is no contradiction when we state that man must dispel what is harmful to him even at the cost of his own pain.
Tradition says that mind goes in front of the elements of existence and mind is the best among them. If one, being only interested in what is salutary, does what is salutary, even at the cost of personal pain, how can that prove unprofitable to him?
One must do that which will, in the future, be salutary to oneself and to others even if it is (at present) painful; how much more, then, must he do that which is pleasant and equally salutary to the doer and to others? this is the eternal law.
If by giving up a bit of pleasure one may get afterwards a large joy, a brave man should give up that bit of pleasure, having in his mind the large joy to be gained in the future.
If one is unable to stand even that, then doctores, etc., prescribing bitter medicaments would be ruined. But this principle cannot be applied.
What seems unsalutary is considered sometimes by the experts to be salutary; a general rule and the exception are praised in all philosophical systems.
How could a man in full possession of his mental faculties abuse the Great Vehicle where it is stated that all results are preceded by compassion and purified by wisdom.
Ignorant men, enemies of themselves as well as of others, on account of their bewilderment abuse to-day this Great Vehicle, being troubled by its extreme excellence and its extreme depth.
This Great Vehicle is composed of many virtues such as those of liberality, morality, patience, energy, meditation, wisdom, compassion; how is it therefore possible that there is in it any wrong utterance?
By liberality and morality one realizes the profit of others; by patience and energy one’s own profit; meditation and wisdom are conducive to liberation. This is the summary of the contents of the Great Vehicle.
The teaching of Buddha is condensed in precepts which are salutary to others as well as to oneself and are conducive to liberation. They are included in the six perfections; therefore this (Great Vehicle) is indeed the utterance of the Buddha.
That Great Vehicle, in which the Buddhas have shown the great path leading to illumination and consisting in acquisition of moral merits and wisdom, is not seen (by common people) only on account of their ignorance.
In so far as he is possessed of inconceivable attributes, the Victorious One is said, in the Great Vehicle, to be endowed with inconceivable attributes like the ether (whose attributes transcend mind); therefore you must allow this majesty of the Buddha.
Even as regards moral rules only, he remained a field inaccessible to the noble Śāradvatīputra; how can you not allow that the majesty of Buddha is inconceivable.
According to the Great Vehicle unsubstantiality is considered as absence of birth, but for the other systems void is the destruction of things; destruction as well as non-birth can in gact be considered identical.
How could, then, the other teachings of Mahāyāna be not acceptable to the wise, since they have realized according to reason the principle of unsubstantiality and the majesty of the Buddhas?
It is very difficult to know what the Buddhas have said in their metaphorical utterances, and therefore having recourse to impartiality you must protect yourself (against the different and contradictory wordings of the law as expounded) in the one Vehicle or in the three Vehicles.
Impartiality is not cause of demerit; but (if you are partial as regards some principle and therefore) you hate (another), this is a cause of sin; how can that be propitious? Therefore those who seek their own welfare must not feel any hatred against the Great Vehicle.
In the Vehicle of the Auditors there is no mention of the vow of the Bodhisattva nor of his virtue of devolving upon others the fruits of his career. How is it, then, possible that one could become a Bodhisattva by following the precepts of that school?
The Buddhas did not state in that Vehicle the blessings necessary in order to obtain the illumination of the Bodhisattva. Who else superior to the Victorious Ones can be an authority on this matter?
From a path which is similar to that of the Auditors and implies in addition the blessings, the sense of the noble truths and the coefficients of illumination, how can a superior fruit of Buddhahood be derived?
In the sūtras there is no word designed to enjoin the career towards illumination, but this is said in the Great Vehicle, and therefore it should be accepted by the wise.
Just as a master of grammar teaches even the alphabet to disciples, even so the Buddha teaches the law as it may be accessible to those to be converted.
The Buddha in fact preached to some the law so that they could be freed from sin, to others so that they could accomplish meritorious deeds, to others the law based on a duality.
To some others he preached the law beyond duality, deep, terrifying those who are afraid (of such principles); to others again the law consisting in the two tenets of compassion and unsubstantiality, viz. the two means leading to illumination.
Therefore the good ones must destroy any feeling of opposition against the Great Vehicle and find their supreme spiritual peace in it if they want to attain to perfect illumination.
By having faith in the Great Vehicle and by following the precepts enjoined in it one attains to the supreme illumination and midway to all happiness.
Liberality, morality, patience, truthfulness, are said to be the religion chiefly for the householders; the essence of this (religion) is compassion; it must be taken hold of with great energy.
If you think that to rule a kingdom according to religion is difficult since world (and religion) are opposite, then, if you strive after glory in religion success will be easy.
Chapter Four: Royal Policy
Having become a monk you should train first with energy [in ethics], then take up the discipline of individual emancipation, hear [the scriptures recited] frequently, and ascertain their meaning.
Then, knowing the small faults, forsake the sources to be forsaken; With effort you should realise fully the fifty-seven faults.
Anger is disturbance of mind, enmity discturbs it further, Concealment is a hiding of faults, resentment a clinging to faulty ways.
Dishonesty is extreme deception, dissimulation, crookedness of mind, Jealously is to be hurt by the good qualities of others; miserliness is fear of giving.
To be unembarrassed and unashamed is insensibility to oneself and others, Inflatedness leads to disrespect, while evil effort is a pollution from anger.
Arrogance is haughtiness, non-conscientiousness is to neglect Virtues, pride has seven forms each of which I will explain.
Boasting that one is lower than then lowly, or equal with the equal, or greater than or equal to the lowly is called the pride of selfhood.
Boasting that one is equal to those who by some quality are better than oneself is the pride of being superior. Thinking that one is higher than the extremely high,
Who fancy themselves to be superior, is pride greater than pride; Like an abcess in a tumour it is very vicious.
Conceiving an ‘I’ through ignorance in the five empty [aggregates] Which are called the appropriation is said to be the pride of thinking ‘I’.
Thinking one has won fruits not het attained is pride of conceit. Praising oneself for faulty deeds is known by the wise as wrongful pride.
Deriding oneself, thinking ‘I am senseless,’ is called The pride of lowliness. Such briefly are the seven prides.
Hypocrisy is to control the senses for the sake of goods and respect, Flattery is to speak pleasant phrases for the sake of goods and respect.
Indirect acquisition is to praise the wealth of others so as to win it, Artful acquisition is to deride others in order to acquire their goods.
Desiring to add profit to profit is to praise previous acquitions, Reciting faults is to repeat the mistakes made by others.
Non-collectedness is selfish excitement that is inconsiderate of others, Clinging is the attachment of the lazy to their bad possessions.
Making differences is discrimination obscured through desire, hatred or confusion, Not looking into the mind is explained as not applying it to anything.
One who through laziness loses respect and reverence for those doing practices that are similar Is a spiritual guide who follows not the ways of the Blessed One; he is regarded as bad.
Attachment is a small entanglement arising from desire, When strong it is a great entanglement arising from desire.
Fondness is an attitude of clinging to one’s own property, Unsuitable fondness is attachment to the property of others.
Irreligious lust is the libidinous oraise of women who [in fact] are to be abandoned. Hypocrisy is [to pretend] that one possesses good qualities which one lacks, while desiring sins.
Great desire is extreme greed gone beyond the fortune of knowing satisfaction, Desire for gain is wanting to be known always as having superior qualities.
Non-endurance is an inability to bear injury and suffering; impropriety Is not to respect the activities of a spiritual guide or teacher.
Not heeding advice is not respecting counsel from those of similar practice. Intention to meet with relatives is loving attachment to one’s kindred.
Attachment to objects is to relate their qualities in order to acquire them. Fancying immortality is to be unaffected by concern over death.
Intention endowed with making [one’s qualities] understood Is the thought that due to the appearance of knowledge and wealth others will take one as a guide.
Intention endowed with desire is a wish to help others motivated by desire. To be affected with harmful intent implies that one wishes to harm others.
Dislike is a mind that is unsteady, desiring union is a dirtied mind, Indifference is a body without effort, a laziness of lassitude.
Being affected is the influence on body and colour by afflictions, Not wishing for food is explained as discomfort due to gorging.
A very weak mind is taught as timidity and fear, Longing for desires is to desire and seek after the five attributes.
Harmful intent toward others arises from nine causes: having senseless qualms About oneself, one’s friends and foes in the past, present and future.
Sluggishness is non-activity due to a heavy mind and body, Sleep is slumber, excitement is a lack of physical and mental peace.
Contrition is repentance for bad deeds which arises afterwards from grief, Doubt is to be of two minds about the truths, the Three Jewels and so forth.
[Householder] Bodhisattvas abandon the above, while those who keep a [monk’s] vows strictly abandon more. Freed from these defects the virtues are easily observed.
Briefly the virtues observed by Bodhisattvas are Giving, ethics, patience, effort, concentration, wisdom, compassion and so forth.
Giving is to give away completely all one’s wealth, ethics is to help others, Patience is to forsake anger, effort, to delight in virtues;
Concentration is unafflicted one-pointedness, wisdom is ascertainment of the meaning of the truths, Compassion is a mind that savours only mercy and love for all sentient beings.
From giving there arises wealth, from ethics happiness, from patience a good appearance, from [effort in] virtue Brilliance, from concentration peace, from wisdom liberation, from compassion all aims are achieved.
From the simultaneous perfection of all those seven [virtues] is attained The sphere of inconceivable wisdom the protectorship of the world.
Just as the eight levels of Hearers are explained in their vehicle, So are the ten Bodhisattva stages in the Mahāyāna.
The first of these is the Very Joyous since the Bodhisattva is rejoicing. He forsakes the three entwinements and is born into the lineage of the Tathāgatas.
Through the maturation of these qualities the perfection of giving becomes supreme, He vibrates a hundred worlds and becomes a great lord of the world.
The second is called the Stainless because the ten [virtuous] actions Of body, speech and mind are stainless and he naturally abides in them.
Through the maturation of these qualities the perfection of ethics becomes supreme, He becomes a Universal Monarch helping beings, master of teh glorious [four continents] and of the seven precious substances.
The third stage is called the Shining because the pacifying light of wisdom arises. The concentrations and clairvoyances are generated, while desire and hatred are extinguished completely.
Through the maturation of these qualities he practices supremely the deeds of patience And putting an end to desire completely becomes a great wise king of the gods.
The fourth is called the Radiant because the light of true wisdom arises In which he cultivates supremely the auxiliaries of enlightenment.
Through the maturation of these qualities he becomes a king of the gods in [the heaven] Without Combat, He is skilled in quelling the arising of the view that the transitory collection [is a real self].
The fifth is called the Extremely Difficult to Overcome since all evil ones find it extremely hard to conquer him; He becomes skilled in knowing the subtle meanings of the noble truths and so forth.
Through the maturation of these qualities he becomes a king of the gods abiding in the Joyous Heaven, He overcomes the sources of afflictions and the views of all Forders.
The sixth is called the approaching because he is approaching the qualities of a Buddha; Through familiarity with calm abiding and special insight he attains cessation and is thus advanced [in wisdom].
Through the maturation of these qualities he becomes a king of the gods [in the heaven] of Liking Emanation. Hearers cannot surpass him, he pacifies those with the pride of superiority.
The seventh is the Gone Afar because the number [of his qualities] has increased, Moment by moment he can enter the equipoise of cessation.
Through the maturation of these qualities he becomes a master of the gods [in the heaven] of Control of Others’ Emanations, He becomes a great leader of teachers for he knows direct realisation of the [four] noble truths.
The eighth is the Immovable, the youthful stage, through non-conceptuality he is immobable And the spheres of his body, speech and mind’s activities are inconceivable.
Through the maturation of these qualities he becomes a Brahmā, master of a thousand worlds, Foe Destroyer and Solitary Realisers and so forth cannot surpass him in establishing the meaning [of the doctrines].
The ninth stage is called Good Intelligence, Like a regent he has attained correct individual realisation and therefore has good intelligence.
Through the maturation of these qualities he becomes a Brahmā who is master of a million worlds, Foe Destroyers and so forth cannot surpass him in responding to questions in the thoughts of sentient beings.
The tenth is the Cloud of Doctrine because the rain of excellent doctrine falls, The Bodhisattva is consecrated with light by the Buddhas.
Through the maturation of these qualities he becomes a master of the gods of Pure Abode, He is a supreme great lord, master of the sphere of infinite wisdom.
Thus those ten stages are renowned as the ten of Bodhisattvas. The stage of Buddhahood is different, Being in all ways inconceivable,
Its boundless extent is merely said to encompass the ten powers; Each of his powers is immeasurable too like [the limitless number] of all migrators.
The limitlessness of a Buddha’s [qualities] is said to be like That of space, earth, water, fire and wind in all directions.
If the causes are [reduced] to a mere [measure] and not seen to be limitless, One will not believe the limitlessness [of the qualities] of the Buddhas.
Therefore in the presence of an image or reliquary or something else Say these twenty stanzas three times every day:
Going for refuge with all forms of respect to the Buddhas, excelent Doctrine, Supreme Community and Bodhisattvas, I bow down to all that is worthy of honour.
From all sins I will turn away and thoroughly maintain all virtues, I will admire all the merits of all embodied beings.
With bowed head and clasped hands I petition the perfect Buddhas To turn the wheel of doctrine and remain as long as beings transmigrate.
Through the merit of having done all this and through the merit that I have done and that I will do May all sentient beings aspire to the highest enlightenment.
May all sentient beings have all the stainless powers, freedom from all conditions of non-leisure Freedom of action and good livelihood.
May all embodied beings have jewels in their hands and may All the limitless necessities of life remain unconsumed as long as there is cyclic existence.
May all beings always be [born] as superior humans, May all embodied beings have wisdom and the support of ethics.
May embodied beings have good complexion, good physique, great beauty, a pleasant appearance, Freedom from disease, power and long life.
May all be skilled in the means [to extinguish suffering], and have liberation from it, Absorption in the Three Jewels, and the great wealth of Buddha’s doctrine.
May they be adorned with love, compassion, joy, even-mindedness [devoid of] the afflictions, Giving, ethics, patience, effort, concentration and wisdom.
May they have the brilliant major and minor marks [of a Buddha] from having finally completed the two collections [of merit and wisdom] And may they cross without interruption the ten inconceivable stages.
May I also be adorned completely with those and all other good qualities, Be freed from all defects and possess superior love for all sentient beings.
May I perfect all the virtues for which all embodied beings hope And may I always relieve the sufferings of all sentient beings.
May those beings in all worlds who are distressed through fear Become entirely fearless through merely hearing my name.
Through seeing or thinking of me or only hearing my name may beings attain great joy, Naturalness free from error, definiteness toward complete enlightenment,
And the five claircoyances throughout their continuum of lives. May I ever in all ways bring help and happiness to all sentient beings.
May I always without harm simultaneously stop All beings in all worlds who wish to commit sins.
May I always be an object of enjoyment for all sentient beings according to their wish And without interference as are the earth, water, fire, wind, medicine and forests.
May I be as dear to sentient beings as their own life and may they be very dear to me, May their sins fructify for me and all my virtues for them.
As long as any sentient being anywhere has not been liberated, May I remain [in the world] for his sake even though I have attained enlightenment.
If the merit of this prayer had form, it would never fit Into worlds as numerous as sand grains in the Ganges.
The Blessed One said so, and the reasoning is this: [The limitlessness of the merit of] wishing to help limitless realms of sentient beings is like [the limitlessness of those beings].
These practices which I have explained briefly to you Should always be as dear to you as your body.
He who feels a dearness for the practices has in fact a dearness for his body; If dearness [for the body] helps it, the practices will do just that.
Therefore, pay heed to the practices as you do yourself, pay heed to achievement as you do to the practices, Pay heed to wisdom as you do to achievement, pay heed to a wise man as you do to wisdom.
He who has qualms that [reliance] on one who has purity, love, intelligence and helpful Appropriate speech would be bad for himself, causes his own interests to be destroyed.
The qualifications of spiritual guides should be known in brief by you; If you are taught by those who know contentment, have compassion, ethics
And the wisdom which can drive out your afflictions, you should know [how to rely on] and respect them. You will attain the supreme achievement by following this excellent system:
Speak the truth, speak gently to sentient beings, say what is by nature pleasant, What is [beneficial], most difficult to find; speak to a plan, not defaming; speak independently and well.
Be well-disciplined, contained, generous, brilliantly attentive, of peaceful mind, Not exciteable, nor deceitful, not procrastinating, but steadfast.
Be certain like the moon [when it is] full and radiant like the sun in autumn, Be deep like the ocean and firm like Mount Meru.
Freed from all defects, adorned with all the virtues, become the sustenance of all sentient beings and be omniscient.
These doctrines were not taught merely to help kings, But with the wish in any way to help other sentient beings.
O King, for you it would be right each day to think of this advice So that you and others may achieve complete and perfect enlightenment.
For the sake of enlightenment the diligent should always apply themselves to ethics, patience, non-jealousy and non-miserliness; Always respect a superior teacher and help altruistically without hope [of reward] those bereft of wealth, always remain with superior people, leaving the non-superior and maintaining thoroughly the doctrine.
Chapter Five: The Bodhisattva Deeds
Here ends the Precious Garland of Advice for the King by the great teacher, the Superior, Nāgārjuna. It was [first] translated by the Indian Abbot Vidyākāraprabhā and the Tibetan translator monk Pel-tsek (dPal-brtsegs). Consulting three Sanskrit editions, the Indian abbot Śīkanakavarma and the Tibetan monk Pa-tsap-nyi-ma-drak (Pa-tshab-ñi-ma-grags) corrected mistranslations and other points which did not accord with the particular thought of the Superior [Nāgārjuna] and his ‘son’ [Āryadeva]. It was printed at the great publishing house below [the Potala in Lhasa].